okay all right thank you Eric um I'm
going to call to order the town of
Andover Board of selectman regular
meeting for Monday September 9th uh
we're going to get started at 7:02 PM uh
and our first order of business is the
Pledge of
Allegiance I pledge allegiance to the
flag United States of America and to
the IT stand One Nation God
all right thank you very much
um one
second okay and I know we have a big
crowd today I'm gonna make uh this
announcement at the beginning of this
meeting um I know we have resignation of
Paula King from the board uh I do not
intend to appoint anyone at this meeting
this is our first meeting it's only been
you know 20 some odd days since she
submitted the res uh resignation we're
going to continue to take uh uh
applications and we will sit there and
have uh a more robust discussion next
meeting allow everyone who put their
their name in to uh give a five minute
um overview or whatever they choose to
do and uh we will vote on uh the
replacement at our next meeting so I'm
just making everyone aware that before
we get started so that we don't have any
confusion right uh so now we're going to
move on to um it's
uh public speak really should be first
so we're going to move to public speak
um number three and we're gonna start
with Kathy and Mike
pazi good evening um I um submitted my
last Board of slman report on
transportation for this meeting and I
want to thank the board of slman for
their past support greatly appreciated
all these years um the seniors had their
first cheer yoga today and it was an
excellent
turnout um our teacher is local and
she's extremely knowledgeable and told
us all the things we were doing wrong
and all the things we could improve on
so it was really a fun day um so I also
wanted to say that uh while people in
general have commented on how lovely the
new building is the top question seems
to be will there be an
electronic um door opener from the
outside door to get in uh it seems that
their complaint was it's difficult for
the seniors using Walkers and those with
canes understanding was all uh municipal
buildings had to be Ada accessible uh
that's the American with Disability Act
and um The Lost state that local
governments new build or when you're
altering any facility they must make
them accessible for any disabled
individual so perhaps um you can think
about that I mean then maybe there was
no money or something um the other thing
is I've received
complaints about um today about
residential noise level with regards to
decimals too loud for neighbors and the
exposure to 85 decimal points is
supposed to be considered damaging to
human hearing and any noise exceeding 70
decimal points uh considered disturbing
for a neighborhood so the perhaps the
border of sment uh might consider this
information to help seniors in the
future I think that the question is is
this particular uh strategy and I do
hope that I have the opportunity to
speak to Eric on this because I think
he's aware of this and I do believe that
the senior can be appeased with just a
simple phone call um the other thing is
um oh the seniors have met and they
would like the bard of selectman to
consider assigning an CR as our liaison
since Paula was our liaison and has uh
resigned and lastly the end over
uh Republican Town committee have
endorsed Stephen King to be the new uh
representative on the board of Selectmen
replacing Paul King thank
you right thank you Mike I just checking
you got anything no that's enough Mike
that's perfect thank you um Rachel
Bowman yes you have anything for public
speak no I do not okay Steve Willard
yeah thanks Jeff um I'm
just just wanted to uh I I don't know if
this is the the time yet or it's going
to be the next meeting I just wanted to
endorse Joe
Godwin um for appointment to the board
of Selectmen um I've known him for a
while yet and uh he's got kids in the
school wife works at the school and he's
seems like he'd probably be the next
best
fit all right thank you very much
thanks St Dave
huitt no Jee I don't have any comment at
this time
okay Joe
Godwin y good evening everybody Joe
Godwin uh Board of selectman thank you
um just want to and Joe just so we know
like if you're gonna give a speech for
the position let's do it next week if
you just have absolutely absolutely
that's not what this is going to be just
a quick introduction to to who I am and
uh you know ask people you know this is
an appointment and I and I understand
the um the gravity with that so if
people want to reach out to me between
now uh and that meeting you know feel
free to do that my cell phone number uh
and email uh should be in the the packet
so that's all thank you all right Joe
appreciate it thank you
um
Stephen oh Stephen King I'm sorry yeah
first of all uh I'd like to thank the
RTC for the endorsement uh really I
greatly appreciate that um greatly
appreciate the opportunity um like to
point out that uh um the Optics really
don't look good when somebody steps up
as an unaffiliated candidate
unaffiliated is not a party okay um I'd
like to just remind everybody that we
have minority rules uh that need to be
adhered to and uh uh I hope everybody
understands that uh unaffiliated is
definitely not a party um so uh thank
you again I appreciate it um my contact
information is available again in the
packet and if anybody wants to contact
me please feel free to do so and I look
forward to working with the team in the
future all right thank you Linda fish
all set okay Susan
camarado hello thank you um for allowing
me to speak I just want to bring briefly
bring up the Reese across America
initiative um I had submitted a letter
to you guys the board of Selectmen in
early August and you approved that so I
applied for and was approved to be the
location coordinator for the town of
Andover um I submitted for the three
cemeteries that we have in our area um
so I have put in a notice to the River
East for our first volunteer meeting
that will be held on September 26th in
the town hall community room because I
need a screen and a video um to play
some videos I am hoping that a lot of
the people in the town will come out to
support this event um we have three
months well till December 14th is the
day that the of the Rees day um so we
have a few months to uh coordinate this
get some volunteers to help
um do some fundraising lay of the Reese
spreading the word um and this of course
if nobody knows about what Reese across
America means I should have started
there I apologize um it's an initiative
to lay wath on the
gravestones of veterans in all across
the country and the world actually to um
honor them during the holiday
season so um if you anybody has any
questions or wants to show call me or
show up at my meeting on September 26 I
would really appreciate it and also in
for the future there is a full ceremony
that we will hold at the Veterans Park
on December 14th at noon so I will be
asking for the bard of selectman to um
help support that as well and come out
and give a little speech if you would
like and more details to follow thank
you right thank you very much Shannon
lot um I'm only here to uh look for
hopefully support for the tri board
policy um that Robert England and I have
spent many months working on and it
looked like it was on your agenda for
possible consideration tonight so thank
you thank you Jonathan
Wright no no comment at this time okay
Wayne C Wayne I'm sorry Wayne
K I'm just here to listen in to what you
guys are talking about I'm particularly
interested in the uh minority
representation
question and uh if you got anything to
say about the revisions to the town
Charter okay Chad on the iPhone
okay William
Perez good evening first lman and
everyone else hope everyone's having a
good night I just wanted to I heard a
lot of commotion going on over the last
couple of days so I wanted to actually
get involved and and watch um how this
process was going to happen posist of
being tabled at this time I just hope
everybody has a good night
all right thank youcome Nick
Nicki okay lean
Hutchinson yes I I don't know if this is
going to come up anyway later on in your
agenda my item is um now that the senior
center senior and Community Center
Director is in place is the senior
advisory committee going to be convened
okay Dave
ganian nothing for me
thanks Kimberly
pan nothing for me tonight thank you
okay Dennis O'Brien I'll leave you alone
you don't need to talk right now I would
assume okay so let's move on to item two
additions in deletions to the agenda uh
anyone can I speak please if I if if I
still may there's a page too Jeff oh
page two I
apologize let's move to page
two I have Matt excuse me Jeff yeah
excuse me Jeff yeah hi I'm sorry um this
is a li latch um resident here in town
um I
when I logged in um my I got logged in
under the name of owner so my name isn't
really showing up here I can put my
video
up can you see me now
yes um I just wanted to uh thank you all
for all you do and um I would like to
express my concern for keeping um an
appropriate balance on the board of
Selectmen and as a result um sending my
endorsement for Stephen
King all right thank you Matt
Hart good evening everyone Matt Hart
with the Capal region Council
governments I work closely with Eric
Anderson on a number of topics I look
forward to making a presentation to you
at some point in the future and tonight
I'm just listening in thank you for all
you do serving your community and and
our
region thank you Georgette
we'll come back to you George T gross
gross hi there uh I'm just here to
listen thank you
okay uh I have a phone number that ends
in 5475 if you unmute can you just state
your name and where you live
that's me lean no won skip you all right
uh Carol Lee I think you're on twice but
I have two
carols all set Jeff okay you got it uh
Joanne
Ebert thank you Jeff um I wasn't sure if
you could see me because I did join a
little bit late um I'm so glad I was
able to join in after getting home from
work um I haven't been able to keep up
with what is said um I'm imagining that
it has to do with electing a new board
of selectman member um so I was just
going to add my two cents after I heard
a comment from one of the candidates or
one of the persons coming forward I was
and I'm still proud to have been elected
to serve on the board of Finance you
know I had to hit the ground running and
kind of make myself known and people on
the current Board of Selectmen namely
Adrien he wouldn't mind had said it's so
great that like someone that wasn't even
known got elected well you have to kind
of put work into it and I probably was a
little bit more known maybe 10 years
prior when my kids were in the school
and I was a little bit more involved at
that time but that being said I just
wanted to mention that I'm still proud
of the fact that I did get elected as an
unaffiliated candidate um I just believe
in listening to every issue as they come
out that's how I live my own life too
that's how I've served the last three
years on the board of Finance um I know
that everyone is going to have their own
opinion but um I just needed to say I
wasn't planning on saying anything I was
just going to listen but when that
comment came up um I just wanted to make
it known I I understand that everybody
has their feelings on politics or
whatever I'm proud to have been elected
as an unaffiliated had to get my face
back out there again get my little
brochures out there get my feelings
known touch base with like the seniors
the people at the school the people you
know that are involved in everything so
there you go I mean I just look for the
best candidate so I can't wait to hear
them the night that they come on and
talk about their things thank
you George Jed I'm gonna come back to
you because I see you're
unmuted yes I finally unmuted I just
wanted to support um Stephen
King and I'm interested in what's going
to be changed in the charter
but thank you for all the work you
people
do all right thank you and then I think
the last one I have here is Marcy and I
believe Marcy
Miner hi uh no I don't have anything to
say thank you very much okay all right
and I I'll ask like I should have done
the first time I gotten everybody does
anybody else have anything they'd like
to say in public speak I think I got
Miss Jeff Diane grer Diane granier how
could I do that I don't
know there well and you're unmuted as
well so that's a good thing okay yeah
high-tech I got it um I I just wanted to
thank whoever is responsible for having
the uh Charter um printed in the River
East with all the um things that are
going in and taken out I hope everybody
gets to read that um it was um a whole
page in River East and it was very
informative and I appreciate seeing it
there and uh I thank whoever made that
happen um I think it's important that
the residents um read that and
understand it so they're informed voters
when it comes to November so that was it
thank you okay we need to give Carol Lee
and uh attorney Dennis O'Brien props on
that okay Jeff I just want to me Jeff I
just want to mention one thing there
were some things that Joan Hebert said
when you run for an election and you're
endorsed by a party either the Democrat
or Republican party even if you're
unaffiliated you get seated as a member
of that party so it's much different
than an appointment because we have
kayln Greenhouse she was endorsed by the
Democratic party she was seated as a
Democrat and Joanne was endorsed by the
Republican party and seated as a
republican just to make that
clear okay thank
you anybody else
okay so we're going to move on to item
two on the agenda additions and JS do
any of the members of the board of
Selectmen have anything they'd like to
add or take
away yes I'd like to add an executive
session today before public speak to
discuss Personnel
matters anybody want to second
that I'll second it uh well well do it
all at one we let's do it right now I'll
second it all those in favor I I I have
nothing
um just because I don't know who that
other voice was you don't have to
vote this is now just the members of the
board of Selectmen so appreciate it if
you can all mute all mute yourselves
that would be
great go ahead Eric so I'd like to add
11d
which is local traffic Authority
discussion of the moving the stop sign
to Shad
blow okay anything else for anyone
else okay so I'll make a motion that we
add 11d local traffic Authority uh Shad
below stop
sign I'll second that right all those
second that
I just might want to say that it's the
stop sign on woodfern not on Shad it's
right now it's on
woodfern and then we want to move it
same same area so it's the same spot
right one discussion about one stop sign
it's one discussion right it's just all
right all those in
favor I five nothing okay so four
nothing or nothing I missed Paula
already um
okay so executive session will be
uh we'll put it as
17A executive session after public speak
we'll let everybody speak and let them
go
home okay let's move on we have uh item
four planning discussion regarding goal
settings uh review list of current
projects and grants and determine
priorities for the next 3 five years
Eric would you like to lead that
uh sure so I asked or we discussed at
the last Board of Select meeting and
each board member was supposed to supply
one idea or one of their basically their
top priority for the near-term three to
fiveyear term uh I received one response
back from an cre who indicated that she
thought it would be appropriate for us
to pursue a community solar project um
that was the only I got back in terms of
feedback from the board um in I sent to
you directly and then put in the packet
a project summary as of August
2024 of both the construction projects
and building projects that are uh in
some form either underway or just
complete so that is in your project or
your your packet and I also put in the
packet uh directly following that a list
of what grants that we have right now
that that we are working for so what
obviously we've got a lot of projects
going and we have a fair amount of grant
money um that we've received that we're
you know either spending or waiting on
spending till we get a little further
along so my question for the board is of
those projects what are your greatest
priorities and what do you want me to
focus on the most because the reality is
if I put a little time into all of them
you know all of them are going to
proceed slowly if there's any of those
projects
that you know are most important to you
that will be my focus area so that
that's all I'm just looking for a little
guidance back from the board on what
things that you want me to focus on
well if I look at that I mean we're
already so far with Bunker Hill and so
far with Long Hill so those are projects
that are going to continue to move down
the path with the
engineering correct bunker Hill's done
but just needs to get built and you put
a start date of February of 2025 so we
can move forward with that right
correct listen you're you're only one
the one that I always sit there and come
back to because it's it's out there and
it's not moving forward is the the
building on the Old Town um
firehouse and I keep coming back to that
one because it will add some value for
us in being able to store our equipment
there and if built and designed
correctly will allow us to have some
storage that the town desperately needs
so
um you said there was an update on that
Eric
so there is an update on that I did
finally get uh bug shipo enough that the
State Historical preservation office um
agreed to the document the documentation
we provided for the building so they
have signed that off I went out and got
it printed um it's a little bit of a
pain in the butt because it has to be uh
archival paper and archival ink but but
I satisfied the state's requirement for
that and and three copies are on the way
to shipo so we basically got shipo
approval for tearing that down at this
point um we are also doing the second
part of that approval which is uh you
know addressing the windows at where the
endover historical society is which is
the the museum building so that is back
working I did put an inquiry into the
engineer um who gave us the original
design for the foundation and asked him
whether that Foundation would still be
sufficient if we added a full Second
Story to the building um there they said
it was I was planning on going back to
the company we were planning on buying
the build package from and asking for
redesign for you know essential Frontage
or frontal access to the building um I'm
guessing that is going to add
considerably to the cost but if it's a
priority increase storage there then
that may be an expense that's well worth
it so I am back working on that project
is it frontal access or rear access rear
access right depends where you're
standing if you're in the upper parking
lot do you want to call that rear axis
yeah you could call that rear access
that's probably a better
term Eric can you uh put that list up on
the screen so we can go over oh
sure um maybe
okay can you see that a little bigger
yeah just leave the just leave that list
up okay you don't have to go through all
of your details that you that's in the
package if anyone on uh on the meeting
wants to go look at the package it's all
there it's all in detail but let's just
talk about the individual items Eric and
where we're at and what we can do
differently on any of
them okay so I'll sit there and I'll go
through after I read it and I I'm
obviously
um you know the top three are long-term
projects they need to be handled one at
a time because we can't be shutting down
any of our major roads anytime alt
together at once and it doesn't make any
sense run the projects finish them out
so Bunker Hills first that's a 2025
project uh Long Hill bridge what's your
expectation on that so everybody knows
2026 estimated that's probably 2027 is
more realistic given the rate at which
the state is moving and how many
projects are in the pipeline for the
state right now all right Biza Road the
Culver um Biza Road should be at
substantial design completion by October
or November of this year um and then we
start in on you know state and federal
permitting and it's not clear to me how
long that will take but I don't expect
it to be uh you know short term you know
a couple months I expect that to be six
months to a year to get all the permits
in place all right so maybe on this
project summary which we can put up in
future meetings we just put the expected
date of potential construction or start
of construction so you're assuming the
bazula Culvert 2028 2029 I mean I mean I
know it's 2024 but how long actually I
think the Biza
Culver I don't think we're going to get
to that in the 2025 Construction season
but I think that will be done in the
2026 construction season that's probably
only a three-month project it's not a
real long project because it's quite a
bit
small the 985 th000 is the total project
cost on that right that's the total
project cost to the town that's half of
the total that's with a state local
bridge grant that will cover half the
cost of the
replacement and hopefully in the
meantime SC that the state figures out
their issues related to funding of those
types of projects for small raw
communities like ours and does something
different because we don't have the
money that has been expressed to both
our Representatives as to assistance on
that front
so
um the road workor projects are just as
we go Eric so those are each budget
cycle right correct um the multi-use
pathway on Route 316 obviously we have a
grant we have we you're working through
the design aspect of this and then
there's a lot more um interaction
related to the property owners and
everything else that would need to go on
what your what's your ballpark so
everybody is aware of timing on that
potentially
so the issue with the multi-use pathway
way is that we're going to have funding
that we used from the State Legislative
appropriation that will get us to
approximately the 60% design
stage um and then the question that we
have outstanding with
do is whether the dot will allow
essentially a a canned uh Bridge package
for The Pedestrian crosswalks or do we
need to have an engineered plan for that
so the at some point and and I think
we're eight months to a year from
needing to to do that the town is going
to have to cover the difference in the
design the design only because we have
construction funding but cover the cost
between what we had in the legislative
appropriation and the the cost to
complete the Des design and I honestly
don't have a good feel for what that's
going to be because it depends
significantly on decisions made by the
do as to what options they want for that
um so at some point when we're at the
60% phase and we've gotten you know more
feedback back from the state uh we'll
have to be talking about a supplemental
appropriation for that probably
um but I don't know what that's going to
look like at this
point uh the uh construction's at least
two years
out Percy cook Trail
Improvement so we're just waiting for
the uh de to get back to us and complete
paperwork and complete the agreement on
that that went to town meeting and we
approved the town
contribution and then I need to know
from do whether we can use our existing
engineer who essentially designed the
the phase one or the conceptual portion
of that and just utilize them for the
design um since we already know what
their cost estimate is for doing it or
whether that has to go out to RFP so at
this point that is just waiting on the
the de for the next step
and then the ases uh parking lot or we
should just sit there and say Town
parking lot improvements because it's in
it's includes the remainder of the
parking lot in the town
hall um what's your plan on that one we
G put that so at this point the reason
why I put it just the ades parking lot
Improvement is that the the school board
still very much wants to redo the upper
lot at AES
um we know from the previous bid as of
last year that was roughly
$135,000
uh you know cost
proposal um right now there would be the
money set aside to do that but the
school board has
prioritized doing the
internal uh work Plumbing work to
restore the bathrooms that have failed
um in the upper part of the building so
I think that's going to be funding
dependent um that work could be done
essentially at any time um you we could
schedule that for next spring but we
just have to make sure that we have the
funding to pay for
it um building projects obviously we can
go through each one of these but you you
have Community Center upgrades we
definitely want to sit there and get on
the agenda I know those are funding
dependent at this point in time uh
related to some federal and state but
mostly the
federal um funding that you're looking
for is there anything on that list of
anything that we need to get done what
what do the athletic field upgrades mean
is that the project that we're working
on that's Grant funded correct that is
the Steep Grant to do the pickle ball
courts in the playground and various
lighting upgrades at the field okay
um and Scott I know you're on that
committee have you gotten I mean have
you guys finalized your your wish list
and your
designs um we're trying to get the
engineer to finalize the
drawing okay but most of most
of everything is
very close to being final
yes we need some some uh good
documentation how much square footage we
have for
every different facet of that
area right so the the big question we're
trying to work through with that right
now is do we hire a general contractor
to do the whole project
or do we act as the general contractor
as the town and essentially use Public
Works to do the excavation and then hire
the subs directly um it is possible to
do that um both Chris and the finance
office and myself are going to be
sitting through the the chro training
the contractor training portion because
although I've gone through the training
twice for administrate administering the
contractors um I haven't I don't know
what is involved in that in the
construction management portion if we go
to do that um there is an awful lot of
paperwork involved um it will absolutely
be a prevailing wage job um and it will
have to we will have to do the the uh
hire the correct percentage or assign
the correct percentage to work for a
minority or slash woman-owned business
contractor as well as small business
contractors so if we do it ourselves
it's probably considerably cheaper um
however there is an awful lot of
administrative burden and I want Chris
and the treasurer on board before we
think about committing to doing that
the submission on that is
not it's not that significant I wouldn't
I know you got to get with the treasurer
and but I wouldn't worry about that and
it's not it's following a form and
submitting it to the state to get
reimbursed um
so that
project once we settle on the design
could get started and done because we
already have the funding for that entire
project correct
and we've approved the money that the
town would need to commit to that and
then you would also be able to if you
were the general contractor you would
also be able to use the town the work
being done by public works as an
offset so that is correct and that's
what our intention is Our intention is
to use public works as part of the
town's uh offset
anyway um you know it's just a question
of do we do what the town can do first
and have the GC do the rest or do we
pick off uh greater portions of it um so
that we're still working through right
now well so so now you're considering
doing being the GC yourself then
Eric I'm considering it I know that's
what the the group really wants because
they don't want to spend the extra money
and they want to get as much out of it
as they can right um I just need to make
sure we can handle the administrative
load to do that and you have the
bandwidth to do it you said you didn't
before well that's why I'm saying I'm
willing to go through the shipo training
or not the shipo the chro training the
contractor portal training and figure
out what's actually involved in doing it
I mean so far our luck with contractors
being able to successfully do the
paperwork for that hasn't been too great
either um so I'm not sure we're going to
do any worse than most of the
contractors we hire so uh so yeah I'm
considering
it okay the other ones that are on the
bottom other than the Public Works fuel
delivery system upgrade which needs to
be discussed and it should probably be
discussed at another meeting
um simply because that cost is not in
the budget and we have to
determine what its value really is but
the other ones have been obviously the a
plumbing one hasn't done but the a
bleacher repair is completed correct the
sanding of the floor has been
completed correct the fan upgrade is is
waiting where is it
correct when is that planed to be done
I don't have a date I'm gonna have to
come back to the board on that one
because the cost of the electrical work
required to do that puts it in the realm
where we really should be putting it out
to
RFP um which I have not done so we have
to think about that one a little bit um
I think that's probably outside the
scope of this
meeting um
okay I would like to be part of that
discussion because I would like to look
at the electrical controls and see
what's see what's
required
um okay I just I just want to make sure
that we're doing the right thing that's
all okay uh does anyone else um any of
the other members of the board have
anything they want to discuss related to
these projects
I just like to try to get that fan
upgrade done as soon as possible because
it will be a huge Energy savings
especially in the winter
months I agree it would make basketball
practice more comfortable so let's go
um okay um we're gonna move on to
um I mean do we really want it do we
we'll move on to 4B determine priorities
for next three to five years but we
really just reviewed all those things I
mean there's not anything more
significant that needs to be discussed
um well the question was really what are
your priorities not you know I've given
you a list of what we're doing right
now well Eric if we sit there and we
utilize the funding that that we've
already gotten from the other parcels
and actually execute those programs as
quickly as possible I think we'd be
doing a huge benefit for the community
if you know as far as um
building projects that we
that I mean there's there are there are
Improvement projects that that I
personally would like to see I would
like to sit there and see us have a a
state on understanding with the state
like what the town can do and what the
state will fund for the town to do to
maintain the area along Route 6 which
you know I've been complaining about for
years
because it looks like heck and um I
don't I don't like it um there's certain
things that we can do but it's not our
property it just makes the town look
poor uh look poorly it's not a good
reflection on the town and what we stand
for so
um but I don't have anything other than
putting a sewer down Route Six that I
would love to sit there and see and if
we were going to put a sewer down Route
Six uh it would have to be totally state
funded and then it would be a whole
other issue so um that would be my big
big wish for the town because it would
open us up for some uh potential
additional Economic Development it's not
probably going to happen but
um uh I did share that with
uh the state representative and the
state senator and
uh other state representatives and state
senators that might sit there and think
of considering doing a project between
Manchester and Windam but
um no Eric I think you're doing a great
job I think that the programs and the
projects are are progressing would we
all love them to go faster sure you need
to tell us what you need to be able to
get them executed faster um and then we
can sit there and decide if we can spend
the money and and give you the resources
to do that I would also ask you to talk
to
um um
no my God he worked Central I can't
remember his name I'm sorry and Isley
yes meeting with him tomorrow morning
what you want me to discuss with
um listen what
what what resources he can bring to the
to uh to assist and also what he can sit
there and do to potentially bring um
you know some internships or interns to
assist in some of these these projects
because obviously he has he has all of
the construction and Engineering
background but he also has the
interaction with the university with
Central at least and potentially with
Yukon so maybe there's some resources
that we can bring because the biggest
issue is we we sure I'd love to do all
of it but um it's not like we're going
to throw a significant amount of
additional money at any of these
projects uh you know as an offset set so
if we can find some resources that are
available let's take advantage of it um
so Ed would be my the one person I would
tell you to reach out to and see if he
can direct us to an appropriate um
vehicle or individuals that might be
able to assist you and get some of these
projects moving and get some of the the
basic work done without having you have
to do all that detail work
so um that would be my recommendation
but as far as projects go uh that's a
prettyy long list it's pretty well
funded by grant
money you know for what we're trying to
do yeah now if you ask me the project I
want dealt with
um it would be related to you know how
the the state property that is running
through the middle of our community
looks and and looks
terrible okay um and anybody else have
any other issues related to the projects
or anything else that they would like
Eric to look
at okay let's move on to item five
Charter
revision the status of the questions as
5A um Dennis uh just so we're aware
Dennis O'Brien Tom attorney um those
questions have been submitted to the
Secretary of State or for
approval uh probably not not yet I don't
know they're due not due till the 20th
of this month but I know I talked to
Carol and Carol was going to do it early
so I'm not sure whether they've been
submitted or not I think last late last
week Carol was working on putting the uh
you know the draft report into the um
River East which was successfully done
actually it's two pages not just one and
um you know we we both worked pretty
hard on that last several weeks so car I
see Carol is on the on the line
here they have been submitted and
approved oh terrific so the SEC news I'm
glad I came to the meeting okay so Carol
while you're still here the secretary
estate approved the the questions
and they've already positioned it on the
ballot is that accurate
yes excellent do you have a draft of um
you know without all of the names
positioned that you can show the board
at our next
meeting I probably would be able to
print that off of the
EMS okay that would be great just so we
could sit there and see I mean the
concern uh the concern my concern was
always the number of questions um you
know uh attorney O'Brien worked uh took
input from um Jeff Murray and and myself
and the rest of the board members to sit
there and try to simplify the questions
and make each one of the questions a
little bit U
uh a little bit easier to understand
because there's going to be a
significant number of questions as
people go into The Ballot Box to deal
with all of these issues so I would love
to sit there and see how it looks and do
you think uh Carol that it will be
scannable
versus uh will it be scannable
yes okay perfect
um uh Charter revision Item B discuss
and act upon a resolution per General
statute section to authorize the Town
Clerk and town attorney to prare prepare
timely or timely prepare and approve
explanatory comments pertaining to the
Charter revision ballot questions to be
considered and voted upon by the
electors of the town during the
president presidential election be held
on November 5th
2024 so je yes Dennis uh I just I just
wanted to uh make a slight amendment to
that I did that in in a hurry to made a
deadline last week and I just gotten
back from a doctor's appointment in
Rockville and uh I did leave out a
couple of words uh if I could insert
them or you could move to amend or
somebody could move to amend it's very
simple I just want to make I it's
probably covered by the statute but I
just want to make sure it's in in there
and the second line where it says timely
prepare and
approve print and disseminate I would
add print and disseminate explanatory
comments and most of that's going to be
done by our town clerk but I have the uh
I have the authority to approve the
questions and they have to be U neutral
just uh to uh inform the voters you know
what we didn't say in the questions just
so they'll understand them better
yeah what was the other what what else
did you want to change is that it that
that's it if you got that it was to add
uh print and disseminate
after uh prepare and
approve with a comma in there somewhere
okay so I'll get this started I'll make
a motion to um that we pass a resolution
per General statute section 9- 369b to
authorize the Town Clerk and the town
attorney to timely prepare approve print
and
disseminate explanatory comments
explanatory comments pertaining to the
Charter revision ballot questions to be
considered and voted upon by the
electors of the town during the
presidential election to be held on
November 5th
2024 someone want a second that second
okay Scott person seconded that um so um
discussion on this this is so that uh uh
we prepare a detailed um summary of the
questions which are smaller and shorter
questions so that the voters who would
like to in advance review the
documentation they can sit there and
make up their decision whether to vote
Yes or vote no
so anybody have any further discussion
or questions related to
that okay all those in favor I
I all right four
nothing okay thank you thanks Dennis
thanks Dennis item six a library board
directors I mean um these are all have
been outstanding do we need to deal with
these do we have anybody that's here to
talk about them
Eric so at the last meeting the board
had decided that they were going to in
the community room and decide whether
they felt whether you all felt it was
appropriate because we don't have any
other location for that so if you've
done that then you can make a decision
tonight if you haven't done that um my
personal feeling is that that room
really isn't appropriate uh for the the
the clock because there's no real
Security in the building and you know
there's so many keys that get into that
side of the building that uh it would be
difficult to maintain
secure around an
expensive
fragile
clock um has anyone gone I mean listen I
know from that space I don't think a
clock like that fits in that building or
fits in that spot I mean if it was going
to fit someplace it would fit
in you know I wouldn't I would go in the
town hall on the way up but it's there's
no place for it there's no spot for it
doesn't really work I mean does anybody
have
any real need to want to put that clock
somewhere we gonna talk
about go ahead yeah I I was thinking it
could after being in the new community
center I would think it'd be better in
there um either in that front hallway
area or maybe in the
um that smaller room that has the
pouches and such in it okay um so an
what what I would ask that you do um if
you could is if you could get the
measurements and just look at where that
clock might fit and how far out it would
extend if you have
that um Jeff Ballard should be able to
get them for us okay
right um Community guard solar panel and
water pump I know Jeff Ballard has sat
there and had a discussion on that
um
um I'm I mean I'm not ready to sit there
and and um discuss that today unless
anybody else really is and wants to
discuss
that would you like to table that or
take it off the
agenda for the next meeting
um you can take it off the agenda for
the next meeting because you can push it
till later in the you know early in the
spring next year to discuss that because
he's not going to need any water and
solar because the growing season is
pretty much over and then there has to
be
um uh that community garden needs to be
um handled by the director from the
community center from a standpoint of
she test should get the information from
the group running the gardens and then
come back and appropriately budget for
that because this has happened basically
every year with Jeff Ballard coming to
us with a project and asking us to do a
supplemental appropriation related to
the community garden and while I
appreciate the good work that they do
and the vegetables that they donate to
the um to the food pantry I would
appreciate if they would sit there and
get this done and Advance during a
budget cycle so it can be brought to the
rest of the community so um since it
doesn't need to be done now because the
growing season is basically over and
he's already got his water tank from the
hose from the community center let's
just move it till later in maybe even
included in next year's budget cycle
right
okay um seven appointments
um well we really should do resignations
before we do
appointments
um but we'll do appointments first uh I
know in the packet uh there was included
the uh
RTC letter endorsing Stephen King and
there was also the letter from uh Joe
Goodwin related to uh his
potential
um his potential for that position as
well um I would ask did Eric did we get
anything else I because I know it was
just in the paper on Tuesday have we
received any other letters from any
other
residents that would be a question for
Carol I don't know of any okay Carol no
we haven't no we haven't okay all right
um so we're going to
um deal with appointing the a the
individual next next month to the board
so obviously we as a board received
Paula's resignation after our last
meeting um on a personal note I I want
to thank Paula king um she was uh also
appointed to this board she did a
phenomenal job um she was very committed
to it and I can only wish her the best
because she was u a a great member of
this board for the six years or five
years that she was involved in it and um
I I would like to recommend that
everyone who sees her says thank you for
everything she did for the
town um also at the same time we also
received two other resignations uh one
from the board of finance and one from
the board of education so Steven fuss um
Steven fuss actually resigned from the
board of fin Board of Education and
Brian Briggs resign from the board of
Finance so uh those are also two
additional positions that need to be
filled um they do not come in front of
us though Eric according to anything I
mean
so that's just for informational
purposes there you go okay uh anybody
have any of the issues related to the
appointments or the resignations we'll
combine them as two
okay I should say that I'm uh Jeff I'm
working on an issue pertaining to the uh
interpretation of the minority
representa minority representation rules
and the state statutes the charter and a
lot of details regarding the board of
Selectmen and the uh the other two
boards Board of Finance Board of
Education and um I've done I've
completed my legal research today after
several hours and uh I will be writing
an opinion very
soon okay if you can do that that would
be great yep thank you um item nine Town
administrator's report uh I did not put
a written report uh in your packet I
kind of tried to concentrate on bringing
the project summaries up to date for the
board as well as the current Grant List
um but I'm happy to answer any questions
that the board has about any uh anything
the town is
doing uh where's Public Works and what
have they got going and since they're
our
biggest project performers what do you
got sure so Public Works just finished
uh fixing what's been kind of a
longstanding problem on Aspen Drive uh
we've had a really significant water
seat coming out of the M middle of the
road uh that showed up about four or
five years ago uh so they spent a bunch
of time investigating that um it turns
out there was an existing drain pipe
running under that road that at some
point when the state widened Route Six
it looks like they terminated the end of
the pipe um and when they redid the
catch basins they didn't move any of the
Town structures into that catch Basin so
Public Works dug it up they replaced the
pipe uh they put a su there for the
water to drain into and that got repaved
yesterday so that part should be
addressed they there will be a the next
major problem to tackle is there is a
covert that runs under Gilead Road
that's been causing us problems for
about 10 years or so um a because the
Culver's too small and B because it has
a big sag in the middle um basic
basically the old Culvert failed um and
they didn't have time to fix it properly
so they shoved a smaller diameter pipe
up through the middle of it um and it's
been like that for about 10 years so the
next big thing will be to shut Gilead
Road down a half at a time and repair
that drainage because that's um that
floods out the road very considerably
every time we get a heavy rainfall so
that's kind of next in the priority to
address
um at the same time Abby uh which is a
Paving Company is repaving the area
behind the town hall replacing the
curbing um that was taken out when we
ran the conduit for the new generator
and the Propane Supply to the new
community center in town hall so that
will be finished Paving uh tomorrow um
so those are the two bigger scale Pro
projects that are going on right now and
then the hope is after that to get them
back working on uh uh over fixing
drainage on hendy road and get back to
the hendy road
issues where's the Culvert on
Gilead
uh it's past the intersection of Cone
Road yeah um if you're coming from 316
it's past where Cone Road intersects I
can't tell you exactly where on there I
mean I know what it looks like
but it's before you really start going
downhill on uh
Gilead all
right thank you anybody have any other
questions for
Eric okay uh item 10 old business
um Community Center construction
update and the signage
discussion so the last major step that
had to be done um before we could go
from a conditional Co to a final Co for
that building was installation of the
exterior
lighting uh the exterior lighting uh
went in oh about a week ago um I went
out there after dark on two occasions
and took pictures of it I didn't use a
light meter but I think I demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the zoning
commission chair and the zoning agent
that there was sufficient Lighting in
all the walkable areas along that so I
don't think either of them has any
issues with that uh if you remember we
agreed the town agreed that once the
lighting was actually in if necessary we
would readjust the the large overhead
lights that illuminate the front parking
at the Town Hall um so that has uh that
does not seem like it's going to be
necessary there does seem to be plenty
of light intensity there so uh that's
all I have other
than I would like to have a quick
discussion so we had kind of decided
that the uh sign that was proposed by
Leading Edge really wasn't something
that we were overly happy with um so we
will be working to back that out of the
final cost um of the building and
settling the final uh you know we we
still owe them the 5% retainage uh for
the job so I had worked out with Paulo
what I thought was an appropriate look
for that sign some a little bit more
modern um than what Leading Edge was
proposing but since Paula is not no
longer uh a selectman what I wanted to
do is show you and this is this is does
not say Andover or anything like that
but what I was suggesting was that we do
a simple laser cut uh you know stainless
steel sign and attach that to the wall
and I'll show you a picture if you want
to see it of basically what I'm
proposing um but I don't feel like I
want the final say in this and I don't
know how you want to go about picking
who's gonna design the sign or what
you're going to do with that or what
we're going to do with that you want me
to show you the image may as well show
us the image
y so that was basically what I was
looking at just a relief cut
sign um saying and over community and
Senior
Center I think it'd be fine I think you
might want to sit there and do
something you know and dimensionally but
yes I have no problem with that concept
do we have a sign company that can
execute that for
us I mean I I would find one
but what do you want to do do you want
who do you want designing or picking the
sign how do you want to proceed with the
project do you want me to just try to
bring you back proofs or no what are you
gonna put for a border on it Eric let's
um let's sit there and and Scott by
email we'll sit there and we'll do what
the how the text would
work um and then once we're all
comfortable and we're all good with the
the font and how it what it's saying
which is pretty simple
but we'll then give that to Eric and
Eric can go to a sign company and the
Sign Company can give us some
additional uh functionality like do we
want a frame on this a border on this
and how do we want it shaped out and so
on so
but I have no problem with that concept
but quick question quick question y um
is um is there electrical power nearby
for the sign that we could eliminate
it there is an outlet
nearby um because I've SE some really
cool things where you can put plexiglass
behind this and and put embedded LEDs in
it so it actually like light up the the
text and then you get like a halo around
the outside of it it looks really
sharp that's a very modern look all
right so let let's actually do that and
then Jeff that might be something that I
would assume we'd have to sit there and
get an electrician in because you'd want
to hide all those cords so let let's sit
there
agree we could do a little voltage and
then just do a light sensor so it comes
on at night yeah I I I like the idea
it looks really sharp when you do it
that way I think let's um yeah I will
sit there and have someone I work with
do the a few graphic representations and
then you can sit there and everybody can
pick the one they like the best and then
we'll shrink it down we'll give it to
Eric to get sit there and go get um a
sign put on it because something like
this would look nice on that
building and lit would even look nicer
all right okay anybody
else okay uh 10B discussion of blight
and level of involvement I know Eric put
in the package a significant amount of
information on the
blight current status anybody got any
issues related to that information no
like most of it has been taken care of
which is
good can uh somebody let me know what
the status is of the house up on the top
of long hill and hendy the one that was
demolished and there's just a stone
foundation
left is that a building permit or what's
going on with that property because it's
been like that for
months I mean I rode by there the other
day and the guy was out weed whacking
out front and doing yard work but I
don't have any I don't know what the
status is that's I think 244 Long Hill
yeah is there an active permit for that
is I I just it just looks like they
gutted it and they just kind of left it
and it's been like that for at least six
months now now he's he's tearing all the
uh bushes and trees out of there I saw
this
weekend yeah what's the plan is the plan
to rebuild the house or demolish it I
mean just seems like it's kind of in
limbo yeah good
question I don't I did not recognize
that on the list of permits for 2023
2024 that were in our packet that's why
I'm asking the
question I mean I know I don't know what
the status is so can you get it to us
for next next month and Eric the same
thing goes with 12 Center
Street
um I saw that there was a permit applied
for but it looks like it was in a not in
an approved status so where is 12 Center
Street what are they doing the Old
Market far is that I mean it's
demolished so they don't have to do
anything relative to blight um we did
have a couple blight enforcement actions
against it but that's been addressed
so and I know he had building
plans uh but I don't think it's gone
anywhere
um um but I don't know specific details
on it so you want to know about 12
Center Street and you want to know about
243 Long
Hill
okay wouldn't he have had to get a demo
permit to demo
yes probably
yeah that Foundation doesn't look like
it you could use it for a new house I I
would
say there's a building permit in the
draft that's like the two the two build
the two permits that I was looking at
were 12 Center Street and 243 Long Hill
they're both in draft status so it
doesn't look like they were
approved
and I don't see a demolition permit for
either one of them but I'm assuming 12
Center Street was demolished prior to
that fiscal year
right 12 Center Street was demolished
several years ago so that wouldn't be it
certainly wouldn't be on any current
forms um he also he did get a demo
permit for that yes he did
yeah
okay all right
um let's move
on so we have a 10c certificate of
adoption of the hazard mitigation plan
that was in our package
from who was it Eric was such a nice
fancy plan correct it's about it the
resolution is on page 30 so you have to
make a resolution as a board to adopt
the plan or the plan created so this
plan was basically uh created by crog
through another organization so they
hired ired a different they collaborated
with a different organization to produce
a natural Hazard mitigation plan for all
of the 38 towns in the kog region so we
are obligated as a town to have a plan
um but we don't really have the
resources to draft and come up with a
full-blown plan so the the capital
region essentially um in in
collaboration with cir produces the plan
um at the last meeting I sent you a or
after the last meeting I sent you a copy
of the plan as well as the appendix uh
for Andover to review so now unless you
have any other questions um you could
make you could pass the resolution um
and then we could submit
anybody have any issues related to the
the
plan any
[Music]
questions okay I'll make a motion that
we approve the resolution to
adopt
the hazard mitigation plan provided by
kog to the town of Andover for the town
of Andover
I'll second that
okay uh any further questions or any
more discussion related to the the plan
no all those in favor
I
okay new business um Jeff I'll have a
copy of that uh probably tomorrow for
you to sign and then Carol can witness
and put the town cler seal on it and
we'll be done with that thank you all
right uh new
business uh item a building department
cost
analysis
um listen I I reviewed those items and
um I'd like to know how many new houses
were built in the town of
Andover in that
cycle any ideas Eric
three to five
maybe I I don't know I don't know that's
fine because if I do the math on this
and my math
is The Bu building no not pretty good
the building cost analysis if you took
out the school which is in here a couple
times uh it will be lower than this but
the the average cost that someone comes
in and provides to the Community to town
to be have their permited fees on is
28,258 that
includes the school transactions which
were fairly large so there were only two
it appears like two houses like some
some reason we get to like there's a
$950,000
project for the school that they
permitted estimated cost do we know what
that was Eric
no
idea okay so if you take out the
estimated cost and you took out that
$950,000 and they had another one in
there for the
school um I'd like to know what that
$950,000 was that permit um and I just I
wasn't the roof we did the roof before
I'd like to I would like to know that
but what I was doing was I wasn't
looking for that per se I was just
trying to take the total estimated costs
for all the B building permits which was
$3.8 million and divided it by the
number of
permits which is
136 and you get you know 28,258 so
that's basically saying that every
project in the community started and
permitted that's what they paid their
fees on so I I've always been you know I
I know that that's problematic because
it's a volunteer system um I did like
the uh information at the back of the
packet that everybody got that um this
is always how I want to I I thought
should do it it's on page 79 of the
presentation which basically gives um
you know a a cost per square foot for
what type of project being done and
gives a a building fee for it so uh if
you're going to build a new house it
would be you know $150 a square foot and
that's what you would pay your permits
on um it would make that department much
more uh pay for play and be able to
support itself than it currently is
doing and um I I absolutely believe that
that's where the direction that we
should go in is to sit there and set up
just a a a template and make it easy
because
um you know the last time I started
looking at this I'll just tell you I was
going through a plan and and they put
the square footage down one of the one
of the permits was a square footage on a
on a house to be built and um they
failed to include the second floor and
they decided that their cost was X
and because we don't have a structure
for those types of costs no
one fights back no one no one fights for
the town's interest and the cost related
to the town so
um I definitely think that the item on
page
81 uh we should sit there and put that
into place as soon as possible
right we don't have to do it at this
meeting but we should be doing
this right the problem is that that's
expensive for us because we cannot do
that with permit link so if we do that
we are talking about going to to the
more expensive permitting software which
in the past you have not been willing to
do let's so this is what we tried to do
in permit link right from the beginning
and we were told that basically we
cannot so short of we could make the
building official go through this for
every single project but then we're
going to start potentially running into
more hours with the build
okay can you uh for our next meeting do
like an ROI analysis on what the cost of
this upgraded software would be because
you know if I'm looking at this and I'm
going hey
um you know a new house the old fee
would be $2,800 and the new fee would be
N900
9,355 that's A7
$6,500 increase in the permitted cost
which is really accurate because that's
the cost that they're going to put into
the building not what they're estimating
and giving to the the building
enforcement officer so right there
you're you're making X and I'd like to
understand what the software cost
is but so this was the
original analysis we did that was now
roughly five years ago when we were
putting the software
in to begin with so what we did was
basically obligated the contractor to
put down the correct amount and had the
building official review it to decide
whether it's correct or
not um and how many times in your
knowledge has the building official sat
there and and corrected an
estimate I don't know
that's not a question I've ever asked so
so what I'm asking is that you sit there
and get us the cost of the software
upgrade that would be required for us to
sit there to go to this type of uh
pering fee
structure and then we can sit there and
decide what we do at our next meeting
right okay so you're unwilling to cons
consider either of the options that I
put in there which just increase the fee
basis for reach permit which would
accomplish what you were trying to
do um I still think what you end up with
is you end up with a a voluntary system
for people estimating costs and if you
sit there and give them a higher fee
they're going to try to estimate their
cost lower it's just it's just human
nature it's not anything other than that
so I'm asking you to sit there and give
us the cost of the software because I've
always been a believer that if you just
charge by the square foot then the only
analysis that someone's doing is looking
at the plan and and trying to verify
that their their house plan square
footage is right or their deck plan
square footage was right and you know so
on and so forth
so let let's talk about that at our next
meeting um just one point had a question
on a minute ago about what they spent
980,000 on 25 School Road that's the
community Senior Center
so Eric we put in a permit for that and
zero cost of
course oh so I was on the wrong address
and there you go so Eric has been
putting permits in and I had the wrong
address so we are what what is our
School Road
address well I put 25 into Google map
and it came up with the the empty lot
there that's now the community Senior
Center Elementary School is
35 school is 35 yeah the community
center is 25
25 in the town hall is 25 school grad no
the town hall is 17 school grad 17
School Road I can't get my School Road
addresses together so that is a town
that is a town permit that's okay Town
permit for $950,000 to take out of our
total $3 million so okay let me do the
math for everybody so it's gets gets
worse so
3843 161 minus
950 calculated didn't like
it anyway it's not good so the cost the
cost per project in our town is being
estimated in an extremely low number
right we're wasting money every
day every time a permit is done we're
lost uh 20
$1,430 is the cost of a project in our
town to sit there and do it um it just
seems seems awful low to me and I know
Eric I I I had this discussion with the
previous you know when I first got on
the board with the building in you know
oh my God it's so difficult to do I I
just last we knew the bu Bolton building
inspector was going to get together and
re-evaluate all the fees
the last which is what Eric is doing in
providing all this information which is
very helpful if you looked on page 75
that was Rich's recommendation for what
the fee
structure should
be yeah he he was upping the building he
basically uses that when he reviews to
decide whether the cost basis is
reasonable or not for what they put into
permit link okay so I I would just like
you to sit there and provide
the
um I'd like you to provide the cost of
the software upgrade that we would
need so that way we can make a a
reasonable decision as to what we're
doing
okay
um 11b the tri board policy on the a
capital projects so um I know I had
talked and i' had heard about this
coming through um I definitely want to
read this in a little bit more detail
and understand what it's trying to say I
understand the basis of it I want to get
with the town attorney and understand
what it's doing related to the board of
Selectmen and um how the monies are
being and the capital projects are being
approved because we do have a capital
project program that's in place and the
board of education is on that um Capital
Improvement uh board so I'd like to read
this and understand it and um obviously
the Board of Education and the board of
Finance were driving this and so it's
now on the board of selectman's desk and
um I'd like to table it and move it to
next meeting so we can sit there and and
vote on that or decide what we ask them
to
refine anybody else have any problem
with
that
no
okay um item 11c the king property lot
line
agreement uh Eric where are you related
to all of these components obviously
this came to us in
August uh I think Dennis could probably
answer that better than I at the point
it's a legal issue coming up making sure
you have the descriptions right in that
that's not an Eric thing that's a
dentist thing I think all right well it
is now Eric but uh I'm hoping that you
know as I said to you before that you
and I could sit down and work on it
together because I am not a meets and
Bounds guy and uh you know you are and
uh I would like to sit down with you and
go over it and then um respond to uh Mr
King's attorney Mr Tom McDermot who sent
me those papers so I'd like I could I
could find some time soon unless you're
off busy studying to be a general
contractor I'm trying to be funny sorry
that wasn't funny I can do better than
that but I'm but I'm but I'm gonna I'm
gonna stop okay so anyway so can the two
of you guys get together and sit there
and respond to attorney McDermot so that
we can sit there and have this uh
wrapped up um I'm ready okay pretty soon
so Eric please uh organize that with uh
attorney O'Brien so we can get that done
and if we need to move that to um
attorney brance or something else let's
talk about the costs related to that and
get that if it has to go that direction
let's move that
forward right
okay uh anybody have any other issues on
any of those
items no okay let's uh move on to item
12 the approval of the minute how to do
D Shad blow traffic oh I am so
sorry 11 D local traffic Authority and
the shablo um and and what is the other
Street woodfern woodfern stop sign there
we go Eric what do you
got um so so you asked me to put it back
on the agenda after the last meeting
after one of the the neighbors um
indicated that uh he had an issue with
moving the stop sign um so I did put it
back on I did drive it multiple times
from each Direction and I wrote it in
each direction from my bicycle and I
walked across the crosswalk so I mean
honestly I think there no right or wrong
answer there um I can tell you that
there's zero data in the crash
Conneticut crash repository indicating
that there have been any accidents at
that location under the current
configuration um we have just chip
sealed the road so there is no Stop
Bar um so now would be the ideal time to
do it um if we were going to change the
location
um the only thing I would suggest is
that one of the ways that you can make
it make it obvious which is the burden
side the sign with the stop sign is to
do a center line through the
intersection and just not include that
leg that makes it fairly clear when
you're driving you know who's got right
away over who so I would suggest doing
that and I would also suggest just just
actually right now it's a an unmarked
crosswalk I would convert that to a
marked
crosswalk um since you know that just
gives it a little extra
visibility both both
ways
broon I thought last time we talked
about this we're gonna put another stop
sign
in well so originally you were going to
move the stop sign and then you wanted
to talk about
whether you should move it or whether
you should add an additional one um so
that's you know I'm the local traffic
Authority design you guys are the local
traffic Authority so the only thing I
can give you is what I gave you in that
uh that uh letter I sent you um and was
correct I had the roads backwards I just
reordered the slides in correctly um so
the the first uh one shows the existing
stop sign and the next picture shows the
the uh sight line coming from the other
directions and then the last couple show
the crosswalk itself so at this point
you know it's just a question of you
guys at the last meeting indicated that
you were going to go drive it or walk it
and look at it so uh it's it's up for
your
discussion I can give you my thoughts if
you
want you live there let's go I took I
took a good look at this and
um I agree with Eric I think we need to
Mark the crosswalk going across um we
replace the stop sign on woodfern with a
yield to pedestrian sign coming up
dogwig up to the crosswalk we put a
yield to pedestrian sign Shad blow
coming up to the intersection we put a
stop
sign and I think that'd be problem
solved
because that that that road going it's
it's basically Dogwood to Shad Dogwood
the wood Fern is basically a continuous
Street and I think if we just Mark the
crosswalk with yield to pedestrians and
we put a stop sign on Shad blow I think
it would be I think that's probably the
best thing to
do just from looking at it and from my
standpoint right and you live there are
you okay with that yes that sounds good
Scott anys
oh I went up there that sounds like
it'll work
yep okay it's similar to what we did
down at the lake where with lake was it
was it Lakeside Drive Right that
crosswalk there and you got the signs
and or Island Street yeah whatever that
street is where we have the crosswalk go
to go over to the racks for The
Kayaks just do something similar to that
you'd be fine Eric did you write that
down so you want yield pedestrian
signs on Dog
Wood
and wood wood Fern so just marking the
crosswalk and wood
firm and then we just put a stop sign on
Shad B coming
up so we allow FL FL traffic along dog
with the wood Fern and that vice versa
going straight then we just put the stop
sign on Shadow we just move the stop
sign is that where people come from
because to me it seems like why would
somebody drive all the way around if
they're going to Wood
Fern why would they go up Dogwood to get
to woodern you know if the majority of
traffic is coming directly up from Route
Six it seems like they're gonna take the
first road to get it not the
second well take the first road just hit
the stop sign that's it I mean at the
top yeah you
just I mean it's a T intersection right
you figure it's a T intersection yeah
it's a T intersection
so the top you know when I go there I
don't really see it as a T intersection
it feels like kind of a why I mean I see
what you're saying but I see the
majority of
traffic you know that's going
to Wood
Fern you know is coming up uh Shad blow
not dog but I may be wrong I don't live
there you know no honestly when I come
home from work from East Harford I go up
Hy and then I come down I go up Dogwood
right St through but listen I'm I'm I'm
not I'm not a resident of that street
but those two Dogwood and woodfern run
into each other right they're yeah it's
basically the one road I mean I don't
even know how
they that's why I'm
saying just Do the yield of pedestrians
on that just like we do on the rail
trail Crossings anything else I would
just treat that is a contigous
road so somebody somebody want to make
the motion to get that
done are you gonna make me repeat that
Mo I'll make a motion to put a stop sign
on the end of Shad
blow and a yield for pedestrians coming
up Dogwood with a pedestrian crosswalk
on
Dogwood that good at Jeff m
that's fine with me if that gets this
problem solved and gets it off our
agenda it isn't I don't know doesn't
look like a y to me looks like a t it's
a t it's a t it's a t it's
a it's a t Okay uh so it was seconded by
Ann further discussion all those in
favor
I okay let's move on so now we're going
to move on to item 12 approval of minute
meetings
um I'll make a motion that we approve
the 81 2024 special minute meetings 81
2024 public hearing Minutes
81224 special Town minute meeting
minutes the 81224 regular meeting
minutes and the 923 2024 special meeting
minutes I'll second that all right any
discussion any changes anybody wants to
make to those
minutes okay all those in favor I
I uh the treasurers report was included
in our packet anybody have any questions
related to any of the information
through August
2024 so I do have one thing related to
the treasurer report um I apologize it
did not get in the packet and that is
the
treasur uh asked that both the board and
of Selectmen and board of Finance be uh
explicitly on board with her working
remotely um for the period of time when
she normally goes to Florida uh for the
winter um the board of
Finance uh unanimously agreed that that
that they were fine with it they didn't
have any objection to that I did want to
raise that same point with the board of
Selectmen to make sure she just wanted
to make sure you all didn't have any
issues and you were aware that she
intended to do that
again I'll make a motion that we allow
the treasurer to work remotely
During the period of her
Florida vacation or her time in Florida
uh no I'll revise that I'm just going to
make a motion the town treasur can work
remotely as approved by the Town
Administrator second
that right further discussion all those
in favor
I okay
um so at at the last meeting
you uh asked me to verify that the
payments um to Spring were in fact the
insurance um and I did and it is so I
think that was the the question you had
open out outstanding from the last
meeting okay so from the transactions
that were done in
July spring was a large amount and you
were telling us it was insurance and in
fact it was Insurance correct
okay
um I'm going to give you on the balance
sheet for August it's on page uh
111 um the stiff account sits at 4
million
366 correct has there been any
discussion between the town Treasurer
and the board of um I'll talk to Celeste
um obviously that's a
lot um it would be very beneficial if if
some additional funds were pushed over
to the stiff account to generate as much
interest as we possibly can before the
FED cuts the rates and it starts to
decrease but it's still better than
nothing so I'll sit there and I'll
address that separately
um okay
um anybody have any questions related to
the treasurers
report so related to the stiff account
we do what the treasur is trying to do
is basically keep roughly
$800,000 somewhere in that in
our you know the the checking account we
actually use and put everything else she
has the authority of in stiff so we are
on a monthly or a weekly basis
transferring money back and forth
between the town in stiff to maximize
the amount that's in there and minimize
the amount that's kept in
MN um and maybe you'll know this and
maybe you won't but um there were
two checks for Andover Elementary in
August was that because July was not cut
Timely
uh that
would
probably be the case where do you see
that you're looking in the check
register yeah you have a transaction on
yep a transaction on
8:14 so I would just like clarification
on that and if if the amounts aren't
being paid timely they need to be paid
timely and if they're
if we've moved more money than we should
over there I would like to sit there and
move it to the stiff
account I I believe it was not paid in
July they waited it was in August they
got two months worth okay in August Eric
if you can sit there and verify that and
there's someone waiting to be let in if
you can let them in that would be
great
um and and I would assume just for
everybody's knowledge so like if we move
move to this tax collector report
um you know on page 120 it shows that we
collected
$275,000 in the month of August but if
we went to the month of July we probably
collected upwards of $2.5
million uh collecting all of the real
estate property taxes and all the car
taxes so July is always our biggest
month and I'm assuming the majority of
those dollars when available were moved
into the stiff account to start earning
interest
correct okay
um so we seem to hover somewhere between
2 million and 4 million in the step
account depending on where we are in the
tax collection
cycle and so at some point in time in
the month of July we had returned checks
from residents to the total of
9,392 N4
okay so that lowered our $284,000 to
$275,000 and I'm assuming that that got
added back into our receivables so that
we know where we're
at okay anybody else have any questions
on the tax collector's report or any of
the information provided by the tax
collector
I'll ask one question have we decided
anything uh Eric on um delinquent taxes
and where the tax collector is at with
that uh I don't have an answer for you
right
now um so the answer would be now I
don't know the answer to that okay
uh you saw on page 147 there are
one five six a total of seven tax
refunds uh for a total of
$495
and3 so I'll make a motion that we
approve the tax refunds for a total of
$953 dated 95
2024 I'll second that
okay
um any further discussion all those in
favor
I okay um I'm sorry did everybody vote I
was looking at the paperwork everybody
good all four four nothing
excellent okay um Department reports
senior Transportation Kathy pazi thank
you very much she's not even on anymore
she's left for the she left she left the
building
um again anyone that sees Kathy blousy
should thank her for all the hard work
and everything she's done for the
community for all these years it's
uh her her level of volunteerism and and
her her husband mics is is greatly
appreciated so make sure you say thank
you to them when you see him
all right assessor's
office um
transportation anybody have any
questions on anything related to this
the the building
department anybody have any questions on
the Department of Public Works
information provided in the
packet okay
one thing I do have Jeff and I want to
mention
is it seems like these these sales of of
surplus equipment at the Public Works
buildings are not going through the town
clerk for bids they're going to Public
Works in Eric which they should be going
to the town clerk I feel that's the
proper protocol that we should be
following and for some reason we're not
doing that for the sale of the tractor
and believe the
truck Eric where are those
bids I don't believe we've actually
received a bid yet so I think it's kind
of
irrelevant
that's not irrelevant because they
should be going to the town clerk like
all of je we haven't received any so
that's that's no problem if we when we
get them can we make sure that they get
to the town clerk's office and at least
get recorded in because at least that
way they can get stamped and dated and
and everybody can be happy that they're
all good yes Jay and I are both on board
with that and we have every intention of
doing excellent thank you all right the
library report anybody questions related
to the
library
no okay
um uh it's very nice to sit there and
see uh Tess is the community center um
director um senior senator uh I love all
of the documentation that she's
providing and
uh hopefully she's getting that out how
are you assisting her Eric to make sure
that she gets this out to all the
residents as best we
can Facebook email um um so you know
we're kind of still discussing the best
way to do that um we've sat down and had
uh G gone through webinars and gotten
proposals from two
vendors um
for essentially automating a lot of the
processes of checkin and schedu um so as
you know we use Civic for our
communications platform and our
website uh they have a a
package that will give us most of the
functionality we want for the senior
center and the rec center and to manage
the senior
Transportation um it's pretty
expensive um we've also looked at what
the majority of of uh senior centers in
the area use which is a program called
my senior center that's probably what
we're going to recommend to the board I
don't think we've made a final
determination yet um and then the
question becomes if we do recommend that
what what I would suggest is we use
their um so they have two options they
have one option that's completely free
of advertising and they have another
option that we allow them to place
advertising on the main login screen at
the senior center that lowers our costs
by about 4,000 the first year um and
then um so so basic basically if we did
that we would be looking at about a
$4,000 upfront cost to implement this
and about a $2,000 cost per year to
maintain this and this seems to be the
package that the majority of senior
centers are using um and I suspect
that's going to be our
recommendation okay that's a that's a
something different from what I'm after
um um Diane graner you're on you're on
the phone call uh you're on the phone
call you're on the meeting um can you
sit there and take some time and spend
with Tess to share uh potentially
um ways to get the email addresses for
you know your your dear Diane letter was
a huge hit and it really did help get
information out to a lot of the
community um back before you gave it up
when you thought we got a little bit
better with our town website but these
things that Tess is sitting there doing
the yoga the chair and the different
events if you could sit there and work
with her potentially to distribute that
to as many of our neighbors as possible
to get as many people participating in
these types of events that would be
greatly
appreciated right be happy to do that
thank you appreciate that thanks Diane
tell me what what are her hours is she
at the Town Hall 8 to five or what's uh
community center community figure you
can get her between 9 and 3 roughly most
days at the community center okay right
and that would be great toan because the
distribution of those types of
activities to improve participation by
um all of our residents would be great
and and and it's something that I need
to get with Tess and also get Tess to
get with u an this is something that you
might be able to do to get with um PTA
and the school to allow her to sit there
and access um uh the parents as much as
possible to get children to participate
in all the different types of activities
that are available whether they're
available within Andover they're
available within Hein and and the Ram uh
Community um we just need to do a better
job of of getting that information out
so an if you could sit there also work
with her on on the school side that
would be great because you know um
I'm a big believer that that some of it
is that people don't know about and some
of it is that they just need to
continuously be reminded I mean uh it's
just the same thing of doing you know um
little kid basketball and just trying to
get them to come together I mean we have
a growing School population we should
get as many of those children to
participate as we possibly can um it
only commun you might want to also um
check with the library they do a lot of
um okay programs and things that would
be great if we could consolidate as many
of the groups within the community as
possible to allow Tess to reach out
through um those those entities it would
just help us build more Community
involvement is she doing stuff with kids
too that what you're talking she she's
assisting within the recreation
department her job is to assist within
the recreation programs to sit there and
get people to participate and to
organize those and she's she she's
responsible for the field she's
responsible for the scheduling of the
the gymnasium and working with the
principal and the superintendent on
those items but yeah her job is crosses
not only the seniors and what they're
doing but she crosses over into Youth
Sports and youth activities and you know
we finally have someone
that is going to focus on it and what we
need to do is get them as much of the
information to reach out to the
community as
possible Right but I also want to say
that what I ask test to do is to focus
number one on senior transportation and
make sure that transitions
smoothly um number two work on the
senior
programming um and get as much of that
up and running as we can and then
transition to adding community community
events and Recreation I don't think we
can expect her to do everything right
out of the gate I think that's going to
be a you know a few months down the line
I kind of disagree with that Eric in a
sense that she's doing all of these
great flyers and I don't care for what
event it should go out to everybody what
I'm asking is to have the rest of the
community get involved to build the
database of the email addresses to sit
there and try to allow people to
understand what is up because not
everybody walks into the town Hall and
looks on the board or walks into the
community center and looks on the board
for those types of activities and I'm
just recommending that we use resources
like Diane and resources like the PTA
and resources like the library to sit
there and give Tess the vehicle uh even
if it's just an email Eric even if it's
just an email database to sit there and
execute Hey listen we're doing yoga and
we have 40 open spots come fill them and
it would
it's just it's not I'm not asking for
her to do a lot of extra e effort she's
already done all these beautiful Flyers
I'm asking for a ways to execute and get
them out to the community
so I mean the first thing would be to
just
continue to get people to sign up for
the community
alerts because anybody that's willing to
sign up for the community alerts we can
get information too
but the majority of town residents do
not ever sign up um and don't really
have any interest in signing up that's
that's the problem well that's in
community emails are different
issue I have a question about all this
information that's in the packet that
maybe teth put in she did she develop
these herself or did she like poach them
from other
towns um I found a lot of conflicts in
them when I was reading through
them she's using templates and she's
probably just creating them off of a
template so if there's there's text
issues then you should communicate
directly to her I mean yeah I mean I
found the town of Ellington listed in
here yeah I mean look nobody creates
everything from Whole cloth I mean
everybody Nicks forms from other towns
so if you have are where they're Eric
it's okay an I appreciate that if you
find in some issues please reach out to
Tess and ask her to sit there and do
that um I don't even know if these have
gone out I mean the only one I know that
I know that's gone out is the yoga one
because Kathy pazi sat there and said
she did it so and if you have issues if
you have issues with any yeah one big
thing she's got a thing in here about
covid that about executive orders that
took place in 2020 that only were good
for six months you know that's a major
one that she needs to take out all right
you most of these forms haven't gone out
to the public yet that's good what she
wanted to do was get your feedback and
certainly the waiver and all that stuff
has to go to the town's attorney before
it goes but right now Dennis is kind of
overloaded so I'm waiting on submitting
some of that stuff to denst well
point out my things yeah that' be great
and then Diane when you get a chance
that would be great thank
you okay I would just one thing I would
suggest if you look at Hein when I lived
in Rocky Hill they used to just put out
a like a spring calendar or like a
catalog of all the activities that were
going on in the spring you got a summer
a fall and a winter and you just put it
out on the website with everything on
there and who to contact for each
activity
and and just doing that in a PDF format
it's like eight or 10 pages that works
better than these individual Flyers
because they're going to get lost if
it's just a master catalog Master flyer
works much better okay let's let's work
toward that if I can just comment on
that um when we went from the this and
that which was you know email right into
your inbox versus the website the big
complaint was they have to go do
something now they have to go to the
website and they have to click those
buttons where with the this and that
what they liked was the email came right
to their inbox they didn't have to do
anything and people are basically lazy
um so you have to spoon feed them and so
putting it on the website it's a it's a
good place it should be everywhere but
um I think into their email is um the
best way to get to people
directly I'll talk to Tess thank you but
we also don't
I mean as a town we typically only email
blast those people who have actually
signed up to get the
information like I know if somebody
sends me unsolicited stuff I send them
back nasty grams and say please take me
off your
list that's what happens when you're
cranky
true listen I'm not this is not a final
group of of decisions it's just these
are these are ideas way to sit there and
help test be as as productive in her job
as we possibly can it's a new position
any of the help is is is positive Diane
please just go talk to her it would be
greatly appreciated by me personally
because I know the value that you can
sit there and bring to her and her job
and an you feel free to go talk to her
and talk to her about any of the
information that's in there just one
last comment the this and that list had
700 email addresses on it and they were
all you had to contact me to get on the
list they were not
unsolicited but people knew you talk to
me you talk to me after and we'll sit
there and and try to sit there and see
what we can
do um we'll work it out yes right we'll
just work together so anybody else on
any of the other issues that are here
no okay let's keep going what other what
other that was it so she was the Tess
was the last one that was in
here
okay is that accurate Eric or did I miss
any of the other reports because when I
look through them uh no I mean I guess
the question is you know an said there
were some specific things uh she wanted
changed or had concern about she
can directly she can deal directly with
Tess don't not important to go through
in the
meeting okay um anybody have any other
issues on there any the
department right Eric any
correspondence nope nothing significant
let's let's do public speak so that we
can sit there and move forward so um
Rachel Bowman
yes I do endorse Stephen King as a
representative for the board Selectmen
all right thank you very much uh Diane
grer thank
you okay I'm all set thank you all right
Steve
Willard all set thanks Jeff Joseph
[Music]
Godwin uh just real quick uh I did
submit um a PDF version of the Town
Charter I know there's a lot of uh
revisions that are looking to be made in
November um and one thing I noticed was
getting into the website was kind of
hard to to navigate through the town
Charter uh so I went through the
document refreshed it with uh hyperlinks
and just making it easier to navigate
and that's something that you know I
want to look at trying to do for uh some
of the other documents for the town uh
and again this is separate from from
anything else so uh if you guys have
feedback for me and if I can be helpful
with that just let me know thank you all
right thank you Stephen
King I just want to thank everyone for
the endorsements uh um uh I appreciate
the opportunity to uh uh be a part of
this and uh um thank uh Joe Godwin for
his service and uh if there's anything
it related that I can help with as well
uh that's what I do that's what I've
done for the past 40 Years be happy to
help out in any way I can right thank
you Shannon
Laden thanks everyone um I just wanted
to say that while you're also speaking
to Dennis if you have any questions
about the tri board policy I've spent
months drafting it and redrafting it so
please ask me the questions um two
things I know Eric pointed out um many
questions to the board of Finance um
they've now addressed that and hopefully
we'll be considering the policy
themselves at their September meeting
meeting uh the board of education has
already passed the policy so then we
would pass it along for the board of
selectman hopeful final consideration
the only thing I'll say is that the
policy was came out of the ideas from
the tri board meeting and the whole
purpose is to avoid in the future having
any issues with capital projects at
Andover Elementary School and the
surrounding property so it is a
compromise in that I believe that the
board of education is giving up our
legal rights and Eric pointed out to the
board of finance that they would be
giving up some of their rights pursuant
to the Charter and whatnot but again
it's a compromise so that hopefully all
three boards are working together so we
don't in the future have any of those
issues thanks right thank you Wayne
casses yeah I just like to throw my
support to Stephen King and uh I know
this isn't this isn't the Forum but um
I do have concerns about the uh
modifications to the uh Town Charter and
what appears to be a power grab by the
selectman thank you all right Leanne
Hutchinson nothing thank you all right
um the individual listed as
owner yeah that's that's me Jeff it's
Liz low catch I'm I'm all set thank you
so much okay
uh phone number ending in
5479 it's lean again that's probably me
5475 yep it is yes okay thank you Carol
do you have anything you want to add all
set thank you right Joan
Ebert thank you Jeff yep I have a couple
comments that I want to make after
listening um I just wanted to clarify my
public speak from earlier so thank you
Jeff Murray for pointing it out I was
definitely thrilled to be endorsed after
I put my you know came to meetings got
my face out there did a lot of things
and and obviously um tried to be a
candidate on board of finance and was
endorsed by the Republican party which I
loved I loved all their support
everything was great with that but I
just wanted to point out that I was an
unaffiliated voter who started going to
meetings again after being very involved
in the town you know 10 years prior when
we moved here then I took a little lapse
so it was kind of funny when Adrien said
that I you know was an unknown and I'm
like well I'd been involved so anyways
moving on from that just want to make
that perfectly clear from my mouth the
other thing that I wanted to publicly do
for this person because she has been
present at many many meetings that I've
been involved in or watched is Shannon
Lowden and she just kind of spoke to it
herself but I want her to get the credit
that is due for all the time and effort
and um really a lot of attention to
detail coming to meetings answering
questions and being available to answer
questions at various meetings I know we
didn't take advantage of asking her the
questions during an important part you
know that kind of hurts my feelings for
her because we will ask certain people
but not others but that's been observed
in the town I have no hard feelings
about that either but Shannon deserves
her her flowers on this one cuz she's
been everywhere so I want that to be
said um the other thing is um you all
were just talking about ideas that we
can um use to get the word out and you
know emails or different things with our
new um so proud of our new community and
Senior Center um where I work Manchester
public schools we a while ago changed
our whole email system to Gmail in the
Google system which has been great for
us and I think um you know however you
want to do it I know that the town of
Andover has um Outlook um which we
previously had but once we came on board
with
Gmail and uh Google it allowed so many
things to happen and I would personally
be in happy to anybody that doesn't know
how it operates as far as sharing
documents getting documents out there
signing up creating documents having
other people be able to edit the
document it's just been a great thing I
was really opposed at the beginning just
because everybody at work gets used to
things um I think it could work wonders
for what you're trying to do I think
it'll involve you know tests reaching
out to people to to gather those email
addresses I know that Eric and this is
you know the way that he operates and
this is his personality that I've
observed you know he doesn't like those
emails but people do like receiving
emails because they do not have to go
out for the information such as Jeff
said so Google Gmail would work great
for the town people could sign up things
could be shared there could be groups
made I mean I'd be all over that to help
out if if it's ever needed so thank you
right thank you very much uh ber
lenir nothing for me at this time thank
all right uh did I miss
anyone did I not give anyone a
opportunity to
speak okay all right everybody thank you
very much um I make a a motion on
item
um item
17A executive session I'll make a motion
that we move into executive session and
Jeff I'm assuming do we have anyone that
we need to invite into executive session
i' the board of selectman members and
the town attorney present please thank
you
okay all right so the motion is
executive session with the members of
the board of Selectmen and the town
attorney I'm a second that I'll second
okay all those in favor I Eric can you
can you transfer the ownership of this
to me uh so as far as I know you are a
co-host yeah so but I certainly can uh
waiting L just because I'm over
80 okay we're coming out of executive
session at 950 um I don't believe
there's any uh business in front of us
uh except item 18 so I make a motion to
adjourn second Jeff Mur Jeff Murray
seconded all those hi hi hi all right
thank you very much so we're leaving our
meeting at 9:50 I'll let Eric me all
right thank you guys good night good
night you y bye bye